Hello everyone and welcome to lecture on finding the missing element solution.
So let's go over the problem statement one more time.
Consider an array of non-negative integers.
Then a second array is formed by shuffling the elements of the first array and deleting a random element
.
Given these two arrays find which element is missing in the second array.
So for an example we have this array this list and then the second rate IList something to take.
No I'm saying the term array.
But that's just to be agnostic about which programming language you're using.
So in an interview setting you'll be set.
You'll be asked about arrays in Python.
These are just lists.
We said before in the beginning of this section.
So again I get one array is a python list a second array is a python list the second array as shuffled
elements of the first one and a deleted random element.
Your function should be able to find that random element that was missing.
So let's talk about solution and theory in logic.
So the naive solution just brute forcing it out is to go through every element in the second array and
then check whether it appears in the first rate.
Note that there may be duplicate elements in the arrays so you would need to pay special attention for
that complexity of that approach is order and squared since who would need to do 2 for loops for that
.
A more efficient solution is to sort the first array.
So while checking whether an element in the first array appears in the second we could do a binary search
.
We'll learn more about binary searches in more detail in the searching and sorting section of this course
but if that solution you still need to be careful about duplicate elements the complexity of that solution
is order and log.
And if we don't want to have to deal that special case of duplicate numbers we can sort.
Both arrays and iterate over them simultaneously.
Once the two iterators have different values we can stop the value of the first.
Iterator is a missing element.
So this solution is also also order analog and so let's go ahead and do a solution for this approach
.
Let's jump to solution.
Put in code it out and explain along the way.
So we're going to do is define our finder function takes and the arrays will go ahead and sort theories
.
So now that the arrays are sorted we're going to compare elements in a sort of race.
So for now.
To them one of them two in are going to Zipp theories together and I'll show you what Zipp does in just
the second in case you're not familiar with it.
It's a bit of a python trick.
As for simplifier code I'm making it clear to read that are going to return the first element.
If I don't get a return of the first number there.
So I can explain Zipp first and then we're going to walk through this entire code.
As far as what zip does it essentially just zips together lists.
So if I pass in lists like this for five six the output is a zipped up matching pair of the tuples.
So I get 1 4 to 5 36 so takes the first element put some together a speechless.
Second element of each list.
Puts them together in a tuple.
Third element of each list.
Put them together tuple.
So it returns a list of tuples and I'm doing tuple unpacking here in order to grab those elements.
So continuing on lets go ahead and walk through a solution.
First thing we're doing is we're sorting both both arrays excuse me.
So we're sorting both arrays and then we're saying for those numbers and those pairs as we go along
the indexes.
If the number one of the number of the first array isn't equal to number of the second array then we
know we're just going to return the number of the first array because it was missing after we sort of
them.
Otherwise we're just going to return the last elements of the first array.
So let's go ahead and copy some code to test up this problem or a function solution.
This was the example at first and we got five out.
All right.
Great.
So in most interviews you're actually going to be expected to come up for a linear type solution.
We can use a hash table and stored the number of times each element appears in the second rate then
for each element in the first array.
We're going to decrease this counter once we hit an element of zero count.
That's the missing element.
So let's go ahead and check out the solution.
We're going to learn about hash tables in a more formal manner later on the course.
So don't worry if you don't understand full hash tables right now.
But in order to do this well we're going to do is take advantage of python and its collections module
so I'm going to say import collections.
Go ahead and do that.
All right.
So we're going to do a default dict from collection's module which is just a dictionary in Python where
if the key isn't already in the dictionary it will automatically add it for you.
All right let's go ahead and use it.
So our second solution looks something like this.
It takes both arrays and this is where collection's comes into play.
I'm going say d equals from collections a default dictionary that takes in integers.
So all this does is allows us to avoid key errors.
So if the key isn't in the dictionary instead of throwing up an error it's going to just add the key
to that dictionary.
All right.
So what I'm going to do is add a count for every instance in array one single save for now.
And actually do this for a rate to a safer nomine or a two dictionary Num. added one and then check
if the number isn't in that dictionary.
So I'm going to say for now.
In this case the first array.
So we're to say are one.
If that number count is equal to zero return number because we never counted it and otherwise are just
going to say else
that number is going to be subtracted.
So let's go ahead and check the solution and then we're going to walk through this.
All right.
So that looks like it worked and it matched up.
Let's go ahead and check it on our second one by putting in final two here also worked great.
So let's go to walk through this.
What are we actually doing here.
Well we're importing a default dictionary.
And again this is the same as a normal Python dictionary.
But if the key doesn't already exist there's no error.
You just add the key.
So I'm going to the second array and I'm counting how many times each element shows up.
Saying for number in array two set that key plus one notes I'm avoiding the little if statement so if
I'm in dictionary D because I'm using a default dict So that's what allows us to write.
This is one line right here.
If you try doing this with a normal dictionary this line would throw an error if numb wasn't already
a key in the dictionary but with default dict were allowed to do that.
So as I mentioned we go along the second array for every number in it we add a count.
Then the first rate what we're doing is for numb in or a one if it's equal to zero.
We return numb otherwise we're going to subtract 1.
All right.
So there's two other possible solutions one of them which are going to code out and the other one we'll
talk about the one we're going to talk about is just you could compute the sum of all the numbers in
array 1 and then or at 2 and then subtract a rate to some from Array one sum.
And that difference would be the missing number.
Iterate to.
However this approach could be problematic if the arrays are too long or the numbers are very large
.
You could end up getting an overflow when summing up the numbers or if the numbers are really really
small and have a ton of decimal places you may lose some information.
So the interviewer probably actually wouldn't like that approach even though you might think it's pretty
clever algorithmically and in a programming sense it has trouble.
If the arrays are too long or the numbers are very large you get an overflow issue.
So I would recommend mentioning it but also mentioning the problems with that solution.
Here's the clever trick version.
So you could achieve a linear time in constant space complexity without any problem.
And the way to do that is you could initialize a variable to zero and then do an exclusive or of every
element in the first and second arrays with that variable.
So what's an exclusive or if you go to the solution book and scroll down here.
This is what we're at right now by performing a very clever trick you can do an exclusive or in an exclusive
or basically is a comparison and you can read about it more on the Wikipedia link here.
And we're going to go over this exclusive or we'll see it again in another interview problem.
So don't worry about understanding the solution completely right now.
You'll see it again later.
As far as the exclusive or and what it does is it shows outputs when the inputs differ.
So if your input is a and b if it's 0 0 you put a 0.
If one of them is 1 then you get one.
If one of them's one you get one if they're both the same you get false.
So by performing this kind of clever trick you basically what you do is we scroll down here.
Initialiser result to 0 and then perform an exclusive or between the numbers in the array.
So for now in these some here are one plus are.
We're actually just adding lists.
Remember that.
So if I do this in python let me just copy and paste that.
Show what it does.
If we take these two arrays and add them together like this then we're just basically concatenating
the arrays together.
We're not actually summing each element.
So then you say for now the result stoon exclusive or with that number and then just print the results
.
So you can see as it goes along and then return the results.
So this is kind of a clever trick then I wouldn't expect you to know right off the bat and we're going
to go much deeper into exclusive or because it shows up in another interview problem as a really good
solution and not just the clever trick solution.
So don't worry if we don't completely understand this last solution we're going to see it again later
on this course.
Make sure you do understand the solution right here.
And if you don't understand the default dict then try implementing the solution or just normal dictionary
.
And then remember you could have also sort of the elements to make sure you understand the problems
with the order complexity of this solution.
All right.
That's it for finding the missing elements.
Thanks and I'll see you at the next lecture